Where did Umua Mua come from?
Interesting question. Well, let's go
back to the beginning of the story
first. The discovery of this object
named Umua Mua was in 2017 using data
from the pan stars star survey by Veric
at Al using the telescope on Hawaii that
you see pictured there.
What they found was a small moving
object that appeared as a single point
of light. And this image on the right is
focusing on that dot and allowing
background objects to move. So this is a
long exposure tracking the progress of
this object across the sky. So picking
out it as stationary and everything else
is moving. And there is no sign of any
sort of comet-like tail. And so this was
probably not a comet, probably an
asteroid.
They worked out that it was 33 million
kilometers from the Earth. That's uh 222
of the Earth's sun distance, one
astronomical unit or 85 times the Earth
Moon distance. But at this point, it was
already heading away from us, getting
further away, having passed the Earth
and past the closest approach to the
Sun, the perihelion point, some 40 days
earlier. So, we'd almost missed it. Now,
as is common with these sorts of
discoveries, it's then possible to look
back in the data that's been previously
recorded and locate the object where it
had not been identified in a so-called
precovery image. And we can also track
it going into the future and thereby
compute the trajectory that you see
there from before the discovery on the
flyby through the solar system.
And you can also look at the brightness
of the object. And this is our
brightness curve starting off at a very
low level of magnitude 34 and peaking at
about magnitude 19. So still fairly
faint
at beyond the reach of most amateur
telescopes. That's for sure.
But um it's got this weird double peak
at the top which I need to explain. Now
what happened here was it came close to
the earth and as it got close to the
earth we saw it as bright was obviously
brightening up as it came towards the
sun and the earth to start with and then
it passed by the earth and started
moving away from us and so we saw it as
fainter and you got that middle dip but
then it started getting closer and
closer to the sun and so the amount of
light hitting it went up and so it
became visibly brighter. again before
receding from the sun and the earth and
returning back to its original
brightness.
That took a period of about 3 years on
the inward side and at about 3 years on
the outward side. So this is about six
or seven years worth of observational
data.
Now, when you looked at it in real time,
it showed this very interesting
pattern of brightness that was varying
in uh what looks like a cyclloid curve.
You can see the animation at the bottom,
and it's suggesting that the object was
tumbling and very long and thin, a
cigar- shaped object. Um, we're not
entirely sure of the size. It could have
been as small as a hundred or as long as
a thousand meters. and somewhere between
35 and 167 m wide. So, a small object,
but we're not entirely sure how big.
What was interesting also about it was
the trajectory as it moved around the
sun. It wasn't following a planet or
indeed an asteroid like orbit. It was
behaving a bit more like some small
comets do in a non-gravitational
orbit. So it was deviating from your
standard Kepler's
uh lawbased orbit.
This is usually caused by a combination
of the heat from the sun hitting the
object warming up one side causing the
release of volatile gases melting the
ice and uh causing jets of material to
burst off the surface and that can
create enough thrust to push a small
object off course. Plus, it warms that
side. And if the object is rotating,
then the warm side rotates away from the
sun and reraiates energy in a different
direction. It's called the Yakovski
effect, and that can push the uh object
off the standard trajectory as well.
So, there are a number of reasons for
this, but this seemed to be suffering
all of them and yet showing no
comet-like tail. So, the lack of a tail
really sort of didn't fit with the
source of this um deviated orbit and it
led many people to speculate that this
wasn't an asteroid at all, but was an
alien spacecraft
to the extent that the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence SETI
turned its telescopes to the object to
listen for radio signals including the
Allen array there and other telescopes
as well. But they didn't find anything.
So if this was a alien space probe come
to have a look at us, it was being radio
quiet on the way past.
Now follow-up observations of it, such
as the photograph at the top right
there, revealed that this is actually a
small object and very bright, very shiny
indeed, reflecting perhaps 10 times as
ob uh as much light as many dark
objects. uh some of the objects such as
the moon only reflect about 10% of the
light, maybe even less. And this was
definitely on the very shiny side. Now,
we've seen that before. Things like
Pluto is very shiny and reflects a lot
more light than anyone was expecting.
And it's often the case that we guess
the size of something based on the
brightness and the known distance.
And that was the case with Pluto. it was
much smaller than anybody thought
because it was much shinier. And so
that's probably what's going on here.
And it's probably at the smaller end of
those size estimates.
Now, it's probably very shiny because
it's covered in ices. That's the usual
reason. And in this case, it might be
frozen hydrogen.
That could explain the outging without
creating a tail.
A tail would be created if you had water
ice or methane or ammonia being uh
boiled off the surface because it would
soon cool and freeze and create ice
crystals and those would reflect the
light tail. But the hydrogen wouldn't
cool enough to freeze out again and
would be blown away by the solar wind
and we wouldn't see it. And so that's
the explanation that uh was profered for
that. Now the image also shows a red
color there and that's believed to be
similar to many outer solar system
bodies and we put it down to the
presence of chemicals called tholins.
Those have been manufactured in the lab
in those vials that you see to the right
there and these are carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen organic materials um
that are the possible chemical breeding
ground for the chemistry of life. So
very interesting indeed to see it on
this object.
Now it entered the solar system very
very rapidly indeed doing 26 kilometers
per second
picking up speed and as it passed the
sun that speed had increased all the way
to 88 and it had such momentum that the
sun wasn't able to capture it in any
way. It deflected the orbit. You can see
it's a near straight path on the way in,
bends around because of the gravity of
the sun pulling on it, and then escapes
tending towards a pretty straight path
as it zooms away from us. And it left at
more or less the same speed that it came
in, 26 km/s.
So that's a tremendous speed and it's 10
times as fast as your typical orbital
velocity of anything in the outer solar
system such as Pluto going around the
sun.
That's why it escaped. It was way more
than it needed to get away from the
sun's gravity.
Now, we're here to talk about the origin
of the solar of this. And one of the
possibilities is that it came from a
molecular cloud. These are clouds of gas
and dust out in space, several light
years in diameter, truly huge,
relatively low density, but very, very
cold in the center. All that dust blocks
the pervading starlight from being able
to get into the middle of the cloud. And
so the temperature can be as low as 30
above absolute zero, 30 Kelvin.
And at that temperature, it's
hypothesized that hydrogen can freeze
out and you get lumps and small bodies
of hydrogen ice forming. And maybe those
formed in some molecular cloud and
gravity would have then started them
orbiting around their common center of
mass and perhaps a near miss occurred
and one of them got slungshot if that's
a word out of the cloud and found its
way uh to the solar system and we
observed it as omuam mua. Hence
explaining the presence of that volatile
hydrogen and the outgassing without a
tail.
But there is another possibility and I
came across this paper on the dynamical
history of the interstellar object Umua
Mua. You can see the names of the author
as and uh the contact details and so on.
I'm going to post the uh link to the
paper in the uh description of the video
at the end.
And this was an example of a really good
study looking to see if they could
figure out where it had come from.
Now, what they did was take survey data
of the position and motion of 200,000
star systems within 200 light years of
the sun. That's a lot of data.
And they compared the trajectory of Omu,
Mua and the sun against each of those
200,000 stars. They didn't compare
everything with everything else. That
would have been completely
mathematically not feasible.
What they did was make a threebody
problem 200,000 times over. So it took
each object the sun and omua mua and
computed the effect that the sun and the
individual object would have had on the
passage of muam mua
to decide whether that other star was
relevant or not
and a lot of them could be ruled out as
just not contributing very much to any
deflection. In fact, it allowed them to
drop the number from 200,000 to just
about 100 relevant stars. So, a much
more tractable problem. And the second
step was to look at those 100 stars.
And a manual inspection of the survivors
of that filter was able to further
reduce it down to just 57. And this was
because within that group of a 100
relevant stars,
many of them were components of multiple
star systems. The good example being
Alpha Centuri with uh the components A,
B, and C. So that's Riel Centurus Tolyan
and Proxima Centuri to give them their
names are all close enough to each other
that we could treat them as one body and
forget about the fact that they're
actually separate objects for the
purposes of computing the overall
gravitational effect on the path of omu
mua. So we could replace all the
multiples by a single combo point and
get down to just 57. This is a much more
reasonable sort of problem.
So with the remainder you could then
work out taking their individual mass of
each system into consideration
which had the largest effect and rank
them in order as having greater or
lesser effect on the trajectory of OMU
MUA. And of course, the winners of this
process turned out to be the most
massive nearby stars, which are the
Alpha Centuri system, adding the mass of
all three of them up, and the mass of
the Sirius system, Sirius A, and its
little companion, the pup.
The others are all much, much less
massive, small red dwarf stars with a
fraction the mass of our sun. And the
mass for just to to make it clear, Alpha
Centuri and Sirius add up to more than
double the mass of the sun each. And so
these much smaller red dwarfs or even
brown dwarfs that are a tiny fraction of
the mass of the sun really don't
contribute very much to the deflection.
And so we could uh largely discount
quite a few more in the analysis.
And where this takes you is that there
were just seven stars that came close
enough to be of interest. They came
within three light years of the possible
trajectory. And so these are the ones
that are going to have substantial
effects. One came within.13
of a light year. And you can see which
one that is. It's in red at the right
hand side of the diagram. The diagram
has time going on the horizontal axis
from now at the right to 3 million years
ago on the left and it has uh the
distance from Umua Mua as the track of
each of those objects. So you can see
they they all came fairly close uh but
the one labeled hip 3757 came very very
close indeed. Now the other part of the
analysis was to look at the relative
speed of the that star and um MUA at the
time and the speed for that closest
approach we'll see in a moment but it
was very very high. On the other hand,
there were four of those encounters that
were fairly low speed. And low speed is
important because if you're going to be
ejected from a solar system, having
started with orbital velocity, you might
pick up enough speed to escape the
gravity of the star, but it's very
unlikely you're going to pick up much
more than that. And so, you would likely
depart the star system with a relatively
modest amount of remaining escape speed.
Um, and so that's uh the sort of thing
that we're looking for with these
low-speed encounters.
So, just to look at that close encounter
for a moment, that was the star HIP 3757
and Umu Mur passed it 120,000 years ago,
but it was going very rapidly indeed.
185 kilometers per second of relative
speed. That's uh many times faster than
the encounter with the sun. So, this was
a flyby. This enters the region of space
near the star and just whizzed past it.
It couldn't really plausibly have been
ejected from the system. It's just going
too fast.
However, the better example was this
one. 820,000 years ago, Omua Mua passed
close to Gleaser 876
designation in the Hippocos Catalon
and a much more sensible velocity just
under 4 kilometers per second in this
simulation. And so that is much more
plausible as actually not a flyby but an
exit event kicked out by gravitational
interactions within the star system. So
what do we know about Giza 876?
Well, it's a red dwarf star. It's in
Aquarius. You can see it on the star map
there just next to the delta star. And
it's 16 light years from the sun. So
relatively nearby. And so if Omua Mua
came from the realm of Giza 876, it took
820,000 years to do so in all
probability.
Now, we know that Giza 876,
this little red dwarf star, has its own
family of planets. We know of at least
four, one small one and three giant
ones. So maybe it was the interaction of
those planets that led to Omu Mur being
hurled out of the system.
So that planetary system, we know the
orbits and we know reasonable amount
about each of the planets. We've got the
orbital map here showing that they're
orbiting quite close in the case of D
and further out for C, B, and E. Now the
the labels are the order of discovery.
So B was discovered first, then C, then
D, then E. I don't know why they don't
start with lowerase A, but never mind.
And what we know about them is that B,
C, and E are in a gravitational
tugofwar, making their orbits slightly
elliptical. This is exactly what happens
with the innermost three moons of
Jupiter and it keeps them in in those
elliptical orbits and a tugofwar. And
it's entirely possible that something to
do with the gravitational interactions
of these three planets could be
responsible for kicking Umua Mua out of
the system.
So what do we know about the planets?
Well, taking them from the inner realm
outwards, we start with 876D.
And this is a super Earth planet, 6.8
times the mass of the Earth, likely to
be rocky and baked. Very hard indeed,
because it's orbiting 50 times closer to
the star than we do at 0.0.2
AU and going around every two days. So,
it's probably also tidily locked,
keeping one face towards the star.
And even though the star itself is a
relatively modest 30% or so of the mass
of our sun and uh 3,500 degrees or so,
that's going to be hot. 350
centigrade Celsius. It's going to boil
the water off the surface. And if it's
tidily locked, one side will be very hot
indeed and the other side may be a
little cooler.
Interesting to learn more about this one
as our studies improve. Unfortunately,
these planets don't transit in front of
the face of the star. So, we are unable
to actually look at the uh case of light
being filtered through their atmospheres
as has been done with other worlds out
there, other exoplanets.
Moving on, the sea planet is about the
size of Saturn and is 13% of the Earth's
sun distance, 0.13 AU from the star.
Now, that's just right to be in the
habitable zone where liquid water could
exist at the sensible sorts of
temperatures. Um, but it's not going to
happen on a gas giant planet like this.
Although there is the intriguing
possibility that all the gas giants in
our system have fairly significant moons
and so there's no reason why this one
would not have a moon and that moon
would be in the habitable zone. So
that's very much worth investigating
further.
876D
this is a very large planet indeed. It's
more than double the mass of Jupiter. I
think it's 2.36 times the mass in fact a
gas giant and orbiting around 0.21
astronomical units. So about twice as
far out and therefore the temperature at
this distance would be likely to be
quite chilly. But again uh a bit of
atmospheric warming on a moon orbiting
this giant planet and a giant planet
might have giant moons. Who knows?
And finally, 876E.
This is rather like Neptune. It's an ice
giant. It's 16 Earth masses and uh is
around about a third of an astronomical
unit in 124 day long orbit going around
at the outer edge of the known planets.
But I'm sure that we'll find more as we
learn more about uh this interesting
star system and the possibility that it
ejected Omua Mua out towards us. It will
also be fascinating to learn more about
Umua Mua and so scientists have
considered the idea of sending a probe.
Um now the problem with that was we saw
it on its way out of the solar system.
So there was no warning. We had no time
to get anything ready as it was coming
in. Not really any time to launch a
probe towards it. And it's moving very
fast. Trying to catch it at the speed
it's doing would be very difficult
indeed. We would need to travel twice as
fast as the New Horizon space probe that
went to Pluto. And that would need every
trick in the book, including a slingshot
around Jupiter, a slingshot round the
sun, diving as close to the sun as
possible and picking up as much
gravitational slingshot as we could. And
it would still take 25 years to get
close to catching it. So, uh, probably
not going to happen, but maybe we should
be ready for the next one and have a
probe parked in space, perhaps at one of
the Lrangege points, some where we park
quite a number of our space telescopes
such as the James Web and GIA, things
like that, and have a probe ready to go.
Um, and uh, perhaps even we could put it
in orbit around the moon or something
and ready to hurl it off in the right
direction to catch the next interstellar
visitor.
That way, we might figure out whether
the sci-fi stories are true and that it
was an interstellar probe. More
realistically, perhaps we'd find out
what it was made of and be able to
figure out whether that hydrogen ice
idea is a good one.
Um, and just before I leave you, I'll
just point out that the interstellar
probe idea isn't a new one. And people
made great parallels between Omua Mua
and Rama, as in rendevu with Rama by
Arthur C. Clark. A really good read if
you get the chance. And the shape of the
Rama spacecraft was that long and thin
cylinder. And so it had all the
hallmarks and uh I just find that rather
amusing. So I thought I'd just leave you
with that one. So thanks very much for
listening and well I hope to hear that
we've figured this puzzle out in more
detail in future.